---
title: "Waterloo osu! Cup 16"
cover: "/event-images/woc16_banner.png"
coverAlt: "Waterloo osu! Cup 16 banner image, featuring a goose osu! logo and a golden yellow background."
author: "Feiri"
date: 2024-01-12
---

> *Welcome to Winter 2024! It's time to kick off the 16th iteration of the Waterloo osu! Cup! (wow we've really been doing this for a while now haven't we)*

---

[REGISTRATION](https://forms.gle/DV7M8QQPPkfRotSW9) | [SPREADSHEET](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1i0zRShrGj1t8IXMnd0QEDHmCsN53h_NyXmZ9A2wNfEs/edit?usp=sharing)

---

## Table of Contents
- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Prizes](#prizes)
- [Tournament Structure](#tournament-structure)
  - [Brackets](#brackets)
  - [Mappool Structure](#mappool-structure)
  - [Freemod Pool](#freemod-pool)
- [Match Procedures](#match-procedures)
  - [Pick/Ban Process](#pickban-process)
- [Legal Lineups](#legal-lineups)
- [Forming a Team](#forming-a-team)
- [Miscellaneous](#miscellaneous)

---

**WoC 16** is the sixteenth consecutive iteration of UWaterloo's trimesterly osu! club tournament. In Winter 2024, we are introducing some new tweaks to the standard vanilla tournament format. This is intended to add a few new twists to keep veteran players on their toes, but still keep things feeling familiar and professional.

---

## Overview

- Double elimination bracket
- Variable **_X_ vs. _Y_** players with teams of **2-4 players** max
  - Read [Legal Lineups](#legal-lineups) for more info
- Loser picks
- **Team VS**, **ScoreV2** win condition
- Each team must have at least one [legal lineup](#legal-lineups) for each player
- At least one of the top 2 players in each team must be enrolled as a University of Waterloo student for the Winter 2024 term
- Qualifiers seeding

Tournament staff members are prohibited from entering the tournament as players with the exception of *streamers* and *commentators*.

---

## Prizes

- 1st place: 4 months of osu! supporter tag to all team members, and the elusive Discord role of _Waterloo osu! Champion_ *
- 2nd place: 2 months of osu! supporter tag to all team members
- 3rd place: 1 month of osu! supporter tag to all team members

\* _which the winners may keep until the next iteration of Waterloo osu! Cup (WoC 17) concludes_

---

## Tournament Structure

### Brackets

Teams participating in *Waterloo osu! Cup 16* will be seeded into a double-elemination bracket according to their performance in an eight-map qualifiers event.

If the number of teams is not an exact power of 2, the top-seeded teams will receive a bye into the next round according to traditional seeding rules as used by [Challonge](https://challonge.com). WoC 16 is expected to have enough teams to run a RO16 with *byes*, but this may have to be adjusted depending on the number of teams that actually sign up.

In a double-elimination bracket, all teams start off in the upper bracket, but are dropped into the lower bracket upon their first match loss. Losing another match in the lower bracket results in elimination from the tournament.

Due to the nature of double elimination, this means that some teams may have to be prepared to play two matches over a single weekend.

In the Grand Finals stage, the lower bracket winner can trigger a bracket reset by winning one match against the upper bracket winner, which means that both teams will play the another match starting from 0-0 with a new pick/ban phase. The winner of that second match wins the tournament. Otherwise, if the lower bracket winners do not win their first match against the upper bracket winners, the upper bracket winners will win the tournament.

### Mappool Structure

WoC 16 mappools will conform to the following format in every stage of the tournament:

- FM x8 (Freemod)
- HD x2 (Hidden)
- HR x2 (Hard Rock)
- DT x4 (Double Time)
- EZ(DT) x1 (Easy w/ potential Double Time)
- TB x1 (Tiebreaker)

In every slot, players may optionally pick *Hidden* mod for no extra points (divide player score by 1.06), with the exception of the HD slot, in which all players are _forced_ to play with *Hidden* mod.

Players are not required to pick any mods in the FM pool.

### Freemod Pool

In the Freemod pool, the following mods are allowed to be picked:

- *Easy* (EZ)
- *No Fail* (NF)
- *Hard Rock* (HR)
- *Hidden* (HD)
- *Spun Out* (SO)

*Easy* mod receives a custom 2.0x multipler, which will be calculated into the final score after each map ends. In practice, this means that the original 0.5x multiplier applied by the game will be evened out so that EZ mod has a multiplier of 1.0 in the tournament.

---

## Match Procedures

Maps are played with TeamVS ScoreV2 as the win condition. The team with the higher combined ScoreV2 score wins a point. The first team to win 6 points wins the match. In the case that the match score reaches 5-5, teams will be forced to play the tiebreaker map.

In the case that a tie occurs on any beatmap, the map will be replayed until one team wins.

There are no warmups.

Team captains will be sent invites to the match lobby 5 minutes before the matches start by their respective match referee. With the Tournament Host's permission, matches may be self-reffed in the case that there are no available referees. If a match is self-hosted, both team captains must fill out a copy of a referee sheet.

In the case that a technical issue arises within the first 30 seconds of a pick, any team member may signal to the referee to abort. In self-reffed matches, there will be no aborts.

### Pick/Ban Process

At the beginning of the match, both team captains will use the `!roll` command. In the event of a tie, captains will continue running `!roll` until a winner is decided. The winner is the team whose captain obtains the higher roll value.

First, the *winner* of the roll *protects* a map. Then, the *loser* of the roll *protects* a different map. *Protected* maps cannot be banned during the banning phase.

The roll winner then gets to pick between 1st pick and 1st ban. The unpicked option goes to the other team.

The team with 1st ban will ban one map. The other team will then ban two other maps. Finally, the team with 1st ban will ban one final map.

After banning, the team with 1st pick will pick a map to be played. In every subsequent pick, the *loser* of the previous pick gets to pick the next map, with the exception of when the Tiebreaker must be played.

---

## Legal Lineups

All teams must satisfy a *Legal Lineups* criteria in order to be eligible for participation.

Every registered player has an associated *player cost*. Their *player cost* is equal to the output of the following cost function, where `pp` is the player's bancho PP value at the time of signups closing:

```
c(x) = MAX(0.25, 7.27 * (1 - 0.99986^((pp^1.022) - 2000)))
```

In order for a team to be eligible to play, each player on the team must have at least one *legal lineup* with another teammate. A *legal lineup* is defined as any combination of two to four players whose sum of *player costs* is less than or equal to `10`.

During any map pick, teams may only field *legal lineups* of players against each other. Lineup sizes do not have to be equal when playing a map, so long as both lineups are within the cost limit.

In theory, this means that a 2v4 matchup could be considered *legal* so long as both teams are under the cost limit.

---

## Forming a Team

To form a team, team captains must officially *propose* a team to the Tournament Host (*@feiri* on Discord). This can be done by sending a message in the `Team Formation` thread that conforms with the following format:

```
## Team name: <insert name here>
- <@ mention player 2>
- <@ mention player 3> (optional)
- <@ mention player 4> (optional)
```

Eligible teams must satisfy the following criteria:
- At least half of the players must be enrolled as a UWaterloo student during the W2024 term
- Every player must have at least one [legal lineup](#legal-lineups)

For a team proposal to be accepted, all proposed members (excluding the captain) must react to the message with `:white_check_mark:`. The tournament host will then confirm the team and add the team to the spreadsheet.

_The tournament host reserves the right to veto egregious deranker teams from forming._

---

## Miscellaneous

If any issues arise during the tournament, Feiri (@feiri on Discord)---who will also consult his team---will have the final say on how to proceed. Please enjoy game!

The host reserves the right to make competitive rulings in applicable circumstances where otherwise the quality of the tournament would be subjectively impacted. Yes this is pretty vague but I will not abuse my powers :D
